Analysis of Gene expression
Practical Molecular biology

Learning outcomes:

Structure of eukaryotic genes

Control of gene expression

Storage of genetic material

Histones

Structure of chromatin

Structure of eukaryotic genes

Almost all human genes possess a set of similar characteristics:

Promoter

Transcriptional ‘start’ and ‘stop’ signal

Exons and Introns

Upstream regulatory regions

Things to remember:

Nucleosome wrapping provides a barrier to transcription

Eukaryotic genes are monocistronic

Eukaryotic genes are not continuous- split into coding/non-coding regions

Transcription

RNA is made by Transcription

Transcription
Three classes of proteins are involved in the activation of transcription


Transcription is (in part) controlled by proteins that bind to DNA

Begins at the TATA box
Within core promoter region
5’-TATAAA-3’
General transcription factor proteins bind
Histones proteins bind

RNA polymerase binds to the TATA box
~50bp upstream of the start codon
Gives rise to 5’ UTR
Contains regulatory elements

RNA polymerase II

Transcribes all protein-coding genes and many RNA non-coding RNAs

12-subunit complex

Complex but cannot initiate transcription

To execute essential functions:
Pol II must bind with an array of protein/protein complexes

General Transcription factors

Govern initiation

Pre-initiation complex

Roles:
Positions RNA pol II at transcription start site

Denatures DNA

Ensure the DNA is in the Active site of the RNA pol II

Most simple complex

Preinitiation complex PIC (general Transcription factors)
Consists of 8 factors

TFIIF:
Binds unbound RNA pol II to prevent it binding to non-promoter DNA 

TFIIB:
Stabilises the TBP-DNA complex 
Recruits DNA pol II

TFIIE:
Has a role in the transition from initiation to elongation 
Facilitates enzymatic function of TFIID
Has a role in DNA denaturation

TFIID:
Includes TATA-binding protein TBP, and TBP-associated factors
Responsible for binding to DNA sequence


 

TFIIH:
Subunit XPB enable ATP-dependent opening of the promoter at the transcription start site

TFIIA:
Interacts with TBP to stabilise the PIC
TFIIA-TBP prevents repressor binding
 

Mediator:
Co-activator of initiation
Does not interact with DNA, but GTFs and activators
Stabilise PIC 

Only basal rate of transcription is driven by PIC- other proteins including activators and repressors drive rate of transcription 

Distal control Elements play a role in fine-tuning regulation. Sometimes they can be located 1000’s of base pairs away


Distal control elements:

Located far away from promoter region- helps with controlling gene expression by interacting with TFs and reg proteins

Enhancers (Gene Activators):


Needed for maximal gene transcription

Binding sites for Activator protein


Silencers (Gene Repressors):

Decrease or prevent transcription

Binding site for repressor proteins

Activators: Mechanism of action

1. The activator can bind via the DNA-binding domain (DBD) to either linker DNA or to nucleosome bound DNA 

2. The activation domain (ACT) then recruits chromatin modifying and remodelling complexes

3. The activator then recruits an RNA polymerase II holoenzyme complex

RNA polymerase II holoenzyme: in simple terms is the complete and active form of RNA polymerase. The holoenzyme is made up of a core enzyme (which dies the actual RNA synthesis) and a sigma factor (which helps to recognise the starting point of the gene on the DNA). This holoenzyme is important because the core enzyme can transcribe the DNA into RNA but can not recognise the starting point on the DNA sequence- it is the sigma factor that directs the RNA polymerase to the correct place which is the promoter region- once transcription begins the sigma factor detaches leaving just the core enzyme to continue transcribing RNA.   

The activator recruits one, or more remodelling complex……

1. Chromatin Modifying complexes:

Histone tails

Chromatin modifying complexes occur via modification of the histone tails, also known as the amino terminal tails. The histone tails can be modified by phosphorylation (P), Acetylation (Ac), or methylation (Me) at either the serine (S) or Lysine (K) residues. The number listed underneath refers to the amino acid positions within each protein.
Additionally, Histones H2A and H2B can be ubiquitinated (Ub) at their carboxyl-terminal end. 
The modification that is most common studied and discussed is acetylation- This is the addition of acetyl groups to lysine residues. The addition of acetyl groups to the histone tails causes the their positive charge and loose affinity for the DNA sequence, thus allowing transcription to occur more readily. 

The activator recruits one, or more remodelling complex……

2. Chromatin-remodelling complexes:

SWI/SNF complex 

The Switch-Sniff protein complex use energy derived from ATP to move nucleosomes. The precise mechanism of action is unclear, but its thought that the complex functions as an ATP driven motor that move along the DNA and disrupt protein-DNA interactions. 

Eukaryotic DNA exists in a very compact form

Each base pair is approx. 3.4 Å (angstrom) or 0.34nm

The length of DNA in a single cells is approx. 2 metres

The body has 37 trillion cells- total length of DNA is 74 billion kilometres!!!
Stretch from earth to the sun and back 250 x





How does the cell achieve this?

DNA associates with several proteins to form chromatin

These proteins also increase or decrease the compaction of chromatin for gene expression

Different levels of Chromosome structure exist

Nucleosomes are the basic unit of chromosome structure


Nucleosomes

Chromosomes are composed of nucleosomes

Human DNA is wrapped around a core of 8 histones (octomer)

DNA wraps around a histone octomer 1.65 times and 147bp in length

Region between nucleosomes is linker DNA and can vary in length

Nucleosomes generate bead-on-a-string structure

Histones

Positively charged, small proteins (11-22kDa) that assemble into a disc-like structure in the presence of DNA. 

The histone core is composed of two copies of each core histone: H2A, H2B, H3 and H4.

Histone H1 binds to linker DNA and is sometimes called the linker histone. 

Histones


The histone tails are not needed for histone to bind to DNA.

Histone tails undergo extensive post-translational modification (methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation).

HOWEVER these modifications are very important in the control of gene expression (and other ‘open’ and ‘closed’ chromatin). 

Higher order chromatin

If you observe chromatin in chromosomes via light microscopy it is 
evident that two distinct forms exist:


Heterochromatin has a condensed appearance and gene expression is ‘off’.
Euchromatin has a relatively open structure and gene expression is ‘on’.

How the nucleosomes are packaged determines whether the chromosome is hetero- or euchromatic in structure. 

This packaging is regulated in part by the linker histone, H1.

Histone acetylation

Histone Acetyl-Transferases:

HATs are recruited to chromatin upon activator binding and acetylate the amino acid terminal tails of core histones

The acetyl group neutralises the +ve charge of the lysine- the more acetyl groups added the more the +ve histone lose affinity for –ve DNA

The chromatin structure loses H1 linkers, and changes from 30nm to 10nm structure

This exposes the promoter region ready for gene transcription

This can be reversed by HDACs

Nucleosome remodelling complexes

A single cell contain many nucleosome remodelling complexes

Slide: moves the nucleosome along the DNA strand to allow access of transcription factors

Restructure: can  change the composition of the nucleosome

Transfer: Move the nucleosome from one DNA molecule to another

qPCR Analysis ddCq (delta delta Cq)
 Steps
Equation 
Answer gained
1.
Mean Cq of gene control - mean Cq of Housekeeping control
Mean Cq of  Gene Treated- mean Cq of Housekeeping Treated
Delta Cq (dCq)
2
dCq of Control –dCq of Control  (answer here should be 0)
dCq of Treated – dCq of Control
 Delta Delta Cq (ddCq)
3
=2^- ddCq Control (answer here should be 1)
=2^- ddCq Treated
Final result

