Protein Isolation

Dr Sara Henderson
H36
Office Hours Monday 2-3, Thursday 10-11

Learning Objectives

Introduction into protein biochemistry
To understand why we might want to isolate proteins
To understand and compare different techniques for protein extraction
To consider different methods for protein quantification and the key points for performing a Bradford assay
To understand the major principles of the Western blot

What are proteins?

Are organic macromolecules with the most diverse range of functions (structural, regulatory, protective, etc)

Translated from mRNA in the ribosomes

A chain of amino acids- (polypeptide)

Central carbon atom
Acidic carboxyl group
Amino group
R-group- This is unique to each amino acid

Protein Folding

Protein folding is the process by which a protein becomes biologically active

The structure of a protein is crucial to its function

Fold begin when amino acids begin to interact

Four stages of protein folding:

Primary: polypeptide chain

Secondary: Generated by hydrogen bonds forming between atoms in the polypeptide backbone  

Tertiary: The beta sheets and alpha helices fold into each other 

Quaternary: results from folded amino-acid chains in tertiary structures interacting further to give rise to a functional protein e.g heamoglobin 


What do proteins do?

Protection e.g. immunoglobulin (antibodies)

Receptor e.g. adrenoreceptor

Contractile e.g. Actin

Hormonal e.g. Insulin

Transporters e.g. efflux pumps

Structural e.g. Collagen

Storage e.g. Ferratin

Enzymes e.g. Beta-lactamase's

Why Would Want to Isolate Proteins?

Determine function

Is the protein present?

Therapeutics (insulin)

Industrial purposes (taq polymerase)

Vaccines (protein based)

Where do we find Proteins?

bacterial
Cheek Cell

Steps to isolating proteins

Obtain biological source of proteins

Extract proteins from biological source

Remove impurities

Downstream applications

Extraction Techniques

Mechanical

Non-Mechanical

Blenders

Bead Beating

Homogeniser

Sonication

Enzymatic

Chemical

A Physical force breaks up the cells

Mechanical

Blenders: Like food blenders they are used to break up solid materials into liquids. Large material is often filtered out through muslin cloths.
Bead beating: Cells are rapidly shaken with small beads which punch holes in the membranes
Homogenisers/presses: Uses high pressures to squeeze cells through spaces they don’t fit causing the cell membranes and walls high degrees of stress that leads to the cells being burst.
Sonication: Produces pulses of high-frequency sound waves. This can disrupt the interactions within cell membranes and walls bursting open cells

Enzymatic

This is for (some) bacteria only!!!
Lysozyme is one example of an enzyme that chews up the bacterial cell wall.

This weakens the defences of the cell membrane and cells are prone to lyse easier. Often used in combination with mechanical or detergent lysis.

This is what we are using in our lab!

Detergents
This is what we are using in our lab!

SDS micelles interact with the cell membrane

SDS creates holes in the membrane by removing phospholipids from the membrane bilayer

The cellular content such as organelles and proteins is released 

membrane proteins are solubilized by SDS

Advantages and Disadvantages
  
Advantages
Blenders - Great for large samples of tissue
Bead beating - Great for small samples and replicate samples
Homogenisers - Great for liquid cultures, Quick and effective
Sonication - Adaptable to different volumes and sample types Cheap and effective once initial set up installed
Enzymatic - Gentle lysis Does not require expensive machinery
Detergents - Moderately cost effective

Disadvantages
Blenders - Not good on bacterial / cell culture or small samples
Bead beating - Generates heat + Poor reproducibility, Difficult for large volumes
Homogenisers - Machinery is expensive and size is limited by set up, Lysis levels is variable
Sonication - Can cause loss of hearing (ear defenders needed), Heats samples, Lysis is not evenly distributed in sample
Enzymatic - Enzymes can be expensive, Not universal, Often results in incomplete lysis requiring mechanical assistance
Detergents - Often results in incomplete lysis requiring mechanical assistance, Can take a long time or require heat

Quantification of Proteins

Coupled Assays:
    Bradford Assay

    Bicinchoninic Acid Assay

    Lowry Assay

Use an external reagent binding to proteins to measure how many proteins are present

The Bradford and BCA assays are considered UNIVERSAL

The Lowry assay depends on the binding of the Folin-Ciocalteu reagent to Tyrosine and Tryptophan reagents and is not universal.


Direct Measurements:

    UV Absorbance at 280 nm

    Fluorescence based assays

Depend on intrinsic properties (presence of aromatic/tryptophan's in the proteins) of the proteins to measure how much is present.

These vary between different proteins and it’s difficult to directly quantify mixtures using these methods

The Bradford Assay

Mix Bradford reagent with standards and samples

Measure absorbance at 595 nm

Plot standard curve and compare to samples absorbance

Bradford Reagent:
Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 Dye – binds to positively charged proteins which causes a colour change proportional to the protein concentration
Phosphoric Acid – creates a stable acidic environment to facilitate dye binding
Methanol – Enhances the solubility of the dye

Key Idea’s:
His Tags – Nickel Resin
GST Tags – GST Resin
MBP Tags – Maltose Resin
Charge Density - Q/S Resin 
Size– Size exchange chromatography

Protein Purification

Start with a mix of proteins – our purple protein with a affinity tag black and the green unwanted proteins

Purple proteins can stick to resin modified with a specific property, but the green proteins cannot

The Purple proteins are then eluted by changing the interaction with the immobilised resin to create a pool of purified protein

Downstream Applications

SDS-PAGE/Western blots

Biophysical Analysis

Structural Studies

Enzyme Activity Assays

Inhibition Studies

ELISA

SDS-PAGE
Sample - We add single subunit folded protein with intrinsic charge and protein with two subunits, B and C, joined by a disulfide bond 
Sample Heated with SDS
Denatured protein with uniform negative charge in sample 
Load sample on the gel 

Monoclonal vs Polyclonal Antibodies
  
Monoclonal Antibodies (mAbs)
Source - A single immune cell recognising a single epitope (specific region) on an antigen.
Production - Commonly produced by immortalised cell lines 
Specificity - Highly specific
Consistency - Uniform in binding characteristics
Cost and Production Time - Cheaper (not cheap) and quicker production


Polyclonal Antibodies (pAbs)
Source - Multiple different types of immune cells, resulting in a mixture of epitopes on the same antigen
Production - Generated by exposing an animal to an antigen
Specificity - Produce a broader spectrum of binding
Consistency - Variable due to mixture present
Cost and Production Time - Cheaper (not cheap) and quicker production

Monoclonal Antibodies (mAbs) - React with a specific epitope on a given antigen
Polyclonal Antibodies (pAbs) - React with various epitopes on a given antigen


Types of Antibodies for Detection

Secondary antibodies attach to an epitope on the primary antibody. This is typically animal dependent (e.g. anti-Mouse). This type of antibody will almost always have a HRP detection tag present

Primary Antibodies attach directly to the epitope they may or may not have a HRP detection tag present

VEGF-A and ADAMS1

VEGF = Growth Factor in Hypoxia

ADAMTS1 = Hypoxia inducible gene


Overview of procedure:

4. Vortex for one minute , keep on ice for 3 minutes

3. Move to centrifuge tube

1. Wash the cells with 1 ml PBS

2. Add 150 µl RIPA and scrape cells into solution

5. Repeat for 40-50 minutes

6. Centrifuge for 5 minutes at 12,000 rpm

7. Transfer protein lysate to a fresh 1.5ml tube- avoid any residual tissue

8. Pipette BSA standards and samples (triplicate) into 96-well plate, add 200µl Bradford reagent

9. Read the plate on the spectrophotometer at 595nm- calculate protein quantification

Bradford assay

Standards:
10µl Standard + 200µl Bradford reagent

X and Y samples:
10µl sample (x OR Y) +200µl Bradford assay

Diluted X and Y samples: 1µl sample  + 9µl RIPA +200 µl Bradford assay (1:10 dilution)

Before you leave: Wait for your printout, label your lysate tubes clearly and place them the group box 

Western Blotting

3x TBS-T washes

Add chemiluminescent detection solution and image

Boil 37.5 µl sample in 12.5 µl 4x Laemelli loading buffer

5% Non-Fat Dried Milk in TBS-T

2 steps for primary and secondary antibody application
